<PageCard>

# useRole

Adds base screen reader props to the reference and floating
elements for a given `role{:.key}`.

```js
import {useRole} from '@floating-ui/react';
```

This is useful to automatically apply ARIA props to the reference
and floating elements to ensure they're accessible to assistive
technology, including item elements if narrowly specified.

<ShowFor packages={['react-dom']}>

<PackageLimited>@floating-ui/react only</PackageLimited>

</ShowFor>

</PageCard>

## Usage

This Hook returns ARIA attribute props.

To use it, pass it the `context{:.const}` object returned from
`useFloating(){:js}` or
[`useFloatingRootContext`](/docs/useInteractions#external-reference),
and then feed its result into the `useInteractions(){:js}` array.
The returned prop getters are then spread onto the elements for
rendering.

```js {4-8} /context/
function App() {
  const {refs, floatingStyles, context} = useFloating();

  const role = useRole(context);

  const {getReferenceProps, getFloatingProps} = useInteractions([
    role,
  ]);

  return (
    <>
      <div ref={refs.setReference} {...getReferenceProps()}>
        Reference element
      </div>
      <div
        ref={refs.setFloating}
        style={floatingStyles}
        {...getFloatingProps()}
      >
        Floating element
      </div>
    </>
  );
}
```

## Props

```ts
interface UseRoleProps {
  enabled?: boolean;
  role?:
    // Native ARIA roles
    | 'dialog'
    | 'tooltip'
    | 'menu'
    | 'listbox'
    | 'grid'
    | 'tree'
    // Custom component roles
    | 'alertdialog'
    | 'label';
    | 'select'
    | 'combobox'
}
```

### `enabled{:.key}`

default: `true{:js}`

Conditionally enable/disable the Hook.

```js
useRole(context, {
  enabled: false,
});
```

### `role{:.key}`

default: `'dialog'{:js}`

The role of the floating element.

```js
useRole(context, {
  role: 'tooltip',
});
```

### Component roles

These are custom roles that are used for floating elements that
more narrowly specify the type of element being rendered. This
enables a more complete set of accessible props for items inside
the floating element.

#### `label{:.string}`

This role should be used for floating elements that act as a
label for a reference element with no text/label (e.g. an icon
button).

#### `alertdialog{:.string}`

This role should be used when the floating element has arbitrary
tabbable content that requires user action and can't be
dismissed.

---

For the following two roles, the `getItemProps{:.const}` prop
getter should be called with `active{:.key}` and
`selected{:.key}` boolean props when spread.

```js
const {getItemProps} = useInteractions([]);

// A given item being rendered in the list
<div
  {...getItemProps({
    active: boolean, // activeIndex === itemIndex
    selected: boolean, // selectedIndex === itemIndex
  })}
/>;
```

These props are derived from the `activeIndex` and
`selectedIndex` states for the
[`useListNavigation`](/docs/useListNavigation) and
[`useTypeahead`](/docs/useTypeahead) Hooks.

#### `select{:.string}`

This role should be used when the floating element contains a
list of items that can be selected. Items receive ARIA props
automatically.

#### `combobox{:.string}`

This role should be used when the floating element contains a
list of items that can be selected, and also has an input for
filtering the list. Items receive ARIA props automatically.

---

### Native roles

These roles are native ARIA roles that are used for floating
elements that are more generic in nature, directly accepted by
the `aria-haspopup{:.keyword}` attribute. Items inside the
floating elements do not receive any roles and must be
explicitly/manually specified.

#### `tooltip{:.string}`

This role should be used for floating elements that add a
description to the reference element they are attached to. The
reference element should have its own label/text.

#### `dialog{:.string}`

This is the default role, and should be used when the floating
element has arbitrary tabbable content (e.g. a popover or modal
dialog).

#### `menu{:.string}`

This role should be used when the floating element contains a
list of items that perform an action, similar to an OS menu (e.g.
File > ). Items do not receive props and must be manually
specified.

<Notice title="Item roles">

Explicitly specify item roles for children: a `role{:.keyword}`
of `'menuitem'{:js}`, `'menuitemcheckbox'{:js}`, or
`'menuitemradio'{:js}`.

</Notice>

#### `listbox{:.string}`

This role should be used when the floating element contains a
list of items that can be selected. Items do not receive props
and must be manually specified.

<Notice title="Item roles">

Explicitly specify item roles for children: a `role{:.keyword}`
of `'option'{:js}` with an `aria-selected{:.keyword}` attribute.

If the options are inside a group, then wrapped inside a
`'group'{:js}` role that is `aria-labelledby{:.keyword}` the
group heading.

</Notice>

For the native roles listed above, only the reference and
floating element receive ARIA props -- you'll need to provide
roles for the items inside the floating element manually if
required, since these roles allow for a wide variety of item
types.

It's recommended that you read
[WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/)
to ensure your item elements have semantic roles and attributes,
especially if you're deviating from the simple nature of the
default roles and adding complex logic.
